How about you, Maynard--
That's my question as well.
How does the dynamic change
between the writer and director or with the actors
when the playwright
is a beginner or more established?
For example,
when I read texts written
by older writers,
it's very rich.
Older.
Ouch!
You didn't even hold back.
If I understand you correctly,
this is where power
relations come in.
That sometimes happens
in Virgin Labfest.
The wide-eyed playwright gets accepted
in the festival and is super thrilled
and then you hand her over
to a well-known director,
you know,
whatever he says will be...
he'll end up reversing
the process.
Suddenly, the playwright
is blinded by the vision.
She'll adopt the director's vision
because the director is well-known.
It's almost like breathing
behind your neck.
Or reverse.
Let's say there's a young director
and then there's an established playwright.
How will you negotiate?
One answer is having a contract
from the beginning.
Not the kind you're thinking,
but a social contract.
Have some coffee first.
A social contract is clear to me.
When I started out as a director,
it was clear I'd mess with the script.
I mean that's clear
or I say it outright to playwrights,
"I'll stand by your script to the death."
That's my pact here.
But there were materials
where I was asked to be the director
because they knew
my ethics and ways of making.
There are those instances.
They offer this material
because they know your working conditions.
They know how you work.
I think it's important to have
a clear talk from the get-go.
But it's really quite difficult
for a young director,
how she can play with the script.
Let's not stage it,
if worst comes to worst.
But you could still negotiate.
I think that's how it is for directors
who get starstruck with veteran writers.
While there are others
who'll just hand it over and say "Go,"
"Go ahead, play with it."
"You might bring
a different resonance to the material."
So there's trust.
There are those who'll say,
"It's just like this."
I'm like, "What is this, a canon?"
Then so be it.
As a director,
I'm also the medium.
I make the connection
however old the material is.
I read not just the piece,
but the context of the times, of when it's being staged.
The meaning-making's
on a different level.
I don't know if I answered the question.
But there's that
sort of awareness to it.
At least when you're
working as a director.
A clear discussion is important.
Like, "Hey, I'm sorry,
I'll be chopping your material."
The match is also very important.
It’s a match from the beginning
so that match has to be made.
Meaning, "Is this the right director
for this material?"
"Is this the appropriate playwright
for this director?"
That's one.
Second is the context.
The context of Virgin Labfest
for developing writers is different
and the context
for Tanghalang Pilipino or PETA
employing professional
staging is different.
I think Virgin Labfest
is a safer environment for writers
because the premise
is this is a playwrights' festival,
not a directors' festival.
It’s not about the director
trying to show off
his interpretation or prowess.
- It's not?
- The director is a vehicle for communication.
For me, as young playwrights,
I think you should try
working with all kinds of directors.
I think it'll make you richer
because you worked with
a really crazy, overbearing director
and then someone that’s cool to work with.
Because you’re young
that’s the time to get into trouble.
You know what doesn't kill you
will make you strong
so that's also
part of the experience.
It’s exchanging ideas
with different types of directors.
So try them.
If you don’t like them,
don’t work with them again.
Like what you said, finding the right fit.
Or maybe you’ll get along in the future.
I feel lucky because
we have playwrights in PETA.
Primarily, I’ve worked
with Rody and Liza (Magtoto).
And ‘cause we’ve known
each other for a long time,
it's not that difficult.
Reaching version 8--
Liza was like that before.
Let's start going there.
I'll ask you to cite
specific examples.
Good, bad.
So we can at least
see how it's like.
In terms of processing, for me,
because we're on a commission-basis,
there’s really a time
like 6 months to a year.
So from the first draft,
we read it several times with groups.
By the time we get
to the working draft,
I personally don’t expect
my writer to be there for awhile
because I feel like
we've already discussed it, threshed it out.
I already agreed
that this is the working draft.
I'll take it from here.
And then give me time maybe 10 days
to 2 weeks ‘til I shape something.
And then I come
and ask you to watch.
Or in the process,
if I tweak something along the way
or move things a bit,
I have the writers informed
of what’s happening.
But I really don’t expect them
to be with me in the room
once I get the working draft.
How about you, Maynard?
You're always there
during rehearsal, right?
Every day?
I mean every step of the way.
But you don’t threaten
the director or anything.
He didn't threaten me.
There are people like that.
When I work
with foreign writers,
the text is theirs,
while I focus on the context.
- Of course, I'm the one on-the-ground.
- That's nice.
The text is yours,
but the context is mine, okay?
So it being Filipinized
won't be a problem.
It's mine to take care of.
Let me handle it.
As for Maynard,
every time the playwright is at rehearsals,
I see it as an opportunity to fail.
Every rehearsal
is an opportunity to fail fast.
Let's fail right now.
Let's be accountable
for what doesn't work and change it.
So it's usually okay
for the playwright to be there.
But there are those
who'll really leave you to it.
Then leave it up to you.
There're people like that.
So when you fail,
it's all on you.
That's why in the past,
I start with saying,
“Okay, game, let's break a leg!"
"Acting, we'll take responsibility, we'll direct it.”
And if the text doesn't really work,
you'll hear it.
And the audience knows
because everyone's giving it their all.
Like “Wow, something amazing happened!"
"But what does it mean?”
But theater rules
usually say it's the director's fault.
If it isn't good,
it's because of the director.
If it's good,
it's because of the writer.
But there are really times
when you can hear the script,
even the audience can hear it,
because I think the play-watching
audience has been cultivated.
They can sense
if there's something wrong.
Sometimes I do this
when I don't get along with the playwright.
I'll stand by this
even if I don't know what it means
because you're not talking to me.
But it will appear
on the text no matter what.
You'll see it if the collaboration's off.
Of course, that's a bad practice
so it's encouraged that we talk.
If we can't see each other, go.
But don't just leave it all behind.
Actually, it's the same for me.
I like having the playwright around,
especially when we have questions.
But not all the time of course.
Sometimes you have co-actors
who badger the playwright
even if they've just arrived.
"What about this line..."
It's crazy how
they ask about everything.
What a pity for the writer.
We should be exploring.
We should explore things
according to how we understand it.
That's when we should ask
if that's what the writer had in mind.
Or is it along the lines, at least,
of your vision for the play.
Because if she gives it all away...
I think as a young playwright
or emerging playwright,
one of the learnings,
looking back,
is if you're a beginning playwright,
make sure that you work
with an experienced director.
If you're a beginning playwright
with a fledgling director,
you might think up
all sorts of things.
Good luck with the direction
of your material.
That's also fun.
Remember “Barrio Cordillera”?
That was our first collaboration.
You have to have
those moments.
Nowadays,
I have a reverse experience.
There's an amateur group
asking for rights to stage "Buwan at Baril"
so I gave them free rights.
I told them to mount it
because I was thrilled they liked it.
When it came back to me,
they already had a
description of the show.
And they devised "Buwan at Baril".
So I asked them if they knew
the meaning of a devised work.
Did it become pro-Marcos?
I asked them that,
the meaning of "devised".
Sometimes using the term "devised"
is an abuse,
an excuse for doing whatever.
- I don't know what it is.
Exactly.
Theater in the route
but they'll call it "site-specific".
It's not like that.
They call it "site-specific".
It's our fault.
But not all alternative
space is a site-specific.
When you're in a bar, it's a bar.
When you're in a bar,
and you do a fourth wall, it's kinda funny.
Theater has a history
and we should know it
even writers and actors.
What's scary is I don't know
how it's going to play out.
I asked the meaning of "devised".
They replied with,
"We'll show the maid."
But the maid was invisible in the original.
What? You'll show the maid?
But the point was she's invisible.
That's what I'm saying.
If you’re a young playwright
working with a director,
make sure the director
at least knows his tools,
knows what he’s talking about.
If he’s talking about devised work,
he needs to know what it means.
Not just something he says.
Most of the time, these things
become trendy so quickly.
But they actually don't know
what it means and how it plays out.
I'll add to that.
Like the idea of experimentation,
experimenting
with playwrights and writers.
People often mistake experimentation
as something without rigor.
That it's just your
run-of-the-mill thing.
But it's not like that.
That’s why you have to bring
the right people on board.
If the director's not experienced,
at least get some actors who're sharp
and can dissect the script.
If it becomes the problem of a playwright,
how to make the actors act,
and the director
doesn't know a thing as well,
then it'll be difficult
because you won't be able to
give life to the characters.
Another abused term
is "out of the box".
This is what I always say,
you have to understand
what the box is first!
Before you go out of the box.
How can you claim
it's out of the box--
It was never from the box
in the first place.
What I’m saying is,
know the rules first
before you break one.
Because how will you say
you broke the rules,
when you don't know
the rules to begin with.